# VCFtoSummStats

A tool for generating a "tidy", plain-text file of SNP summaries from a VCF.

## Building the program

**Building the program requires the g++ compiler.**

You can build (compile) the program from the UNIX/Linux-style command line by
1. cloning this repo
2. cd'ing to it on your command line
3. typing "make" at the command line and pressing return/enter


## Running the program

The program is invoked in the UNIX/Linux-like terminal with a command like this:

```./VCFtoSummStats -V path/to/VCFfile.vcf -P path/to/samplesAndPopulations.txt```

where `VCFfile.vcf` is your VCF file, and `samplesAndPopulations.txt` is a two-column, 
whitespace delimited, plain-text datafile, in which the first column is the sample IDs 
(corresponding to columns ID's of sample data in the VCF file) and the second column 
is a population designation for each sample (more details below).
The "path/to/" should be the same for both files.
(See below for an additional example.)

The `-V` and `-P` arguments are **required**,  i.e., you must supply the names of these two files (and paths if they aren't in the current working directory)


## Assumptions about VCF file format
The program assumes that the VCF file supplied to the program follows the VCF v4.3 format guidelines as found at [http://samtools.github.io/hts-specs/VCFv4.3.pdf](http://samtools.github.io/hts-specs/VCFv4.3.pdf), accessed 5/31/19.


## Requirements of file with information on samples and populations

The second argument to the wrapper script (as shown in the example command above) is the 
name of a file containing information on the samples and the population or taxonomic
group to which each sample belongs.  The sample IDs must be in the first column, and
the population/taxonomic designation must be in the second column. 
The columns must be separated by whitespace. 
The file should **NOT have a header**, but if it does, add a third argument, `-H`, when invoking the program.

## Important default assumptions
* The program's default settings assume that your VCF has a single FORMAT that applies to ALL SNPs.   If this is not true, you must invoke the program with the additional flag `-f <numFormats>` , where `<numFormats>` should be an integer > 1.  Any integer greater than 1 is sufficient to cause the program to check the format each time. 
* See note above about assumption of NO header in the population designation file.


## Example data files provided here
An example VCF and population designation file are provided in the `ExampleDataFiles/` directory here.  The VCF is a subset of a much larger file from the data archive of Schilling et al. 2018 (_Genes_ 2018, 9(6), 274).  
The original publication is freely available at: [https://doi.org/10.3390/genes9060274](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes9060274)
And the data archive is at: [http://bit.ly/2s6jeIf](http://bit.ly/2s6jeIf)

After cloning this repo, you should be able to run the program (with this directory 
as your current working directory) by using the command syntax given above.  
An example that you can use to test it quickly on your system is the following:

```./VCFtoSummStats -V ExampleDataFiles/Small_hmel2.5.30f4.vcf -P ExampleDataFiles/popFileHmel.txt```

That command will cause the wrapper script to run, 
which will call the program with appropriate arguments.
The main results of that command, assuming it runs successfully on your system, 
will be output to a file: `ExampleDataFiles/Small_hmel2.5.30f4.vcf_Unfiltered_Summary.tsv`.
Some other accessory files will also be generated by the script and program.



